[Impeller] Document how to use Impeller as a standalone library with OpenGL ES and EGL. (#52473)
flutter/engine: impeller/docs/standalone_gles.md

# Using Impeller as a Standalone Rendering Library (with OpenGL ES)

> This guide describes how to use Impeller as a standalone rendering library using OpenGL ES. Additionally, some form of WSI (Window System Integration) is essential. Since EGL is the most the most popular form of performing WSI on platforms with OpenGL ES, Impeller has a toolkit that assists in working with EGL. This guide will use that toolkit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to use Impeller as a standalone rendering library using OpenGL ES. Additionally, some form of WSI (Window System Integration) is essential. Since EGL is the most popular form of performing WSI on platforms with OpenGL ES, Impeller has a toolkit that assists in working with EGL. This guide will use that toolkit.
```

> This guide describes how to use Impeller as a standalone rendering library using OpenGL ES. Additionally, some form of WSI (Window System Integration) is essential. Since EGL is the most the most popular form of performing WSI on platforms with OpenGL ES, Impeller has a toolkit that assists in working with EGL. This guide will use that toolkit.

Reviewer 2: trivial nit (feel free to ignore): when introducing a new acronym, it's generally clearer to use the form `bla bla Apple Banana Cherry (ABC)` rather than `bla bla ABC (Apple Banana Cherry)`.

Author: Done.

> This guide describes how to use Impeller as a standalone rendering library using OpenGL ES. Additionally, some form of WSI (Window System Integration) is essential. Since EGL is the most the most popular form of performing WSI on platforms with OpenGL ES, Impeller has a toolkit that assists in working with EGL. This guide will use that toolkit.

Reviewer 2: this document uses "OpenGL ES" and "EGL" but it's not immediately clear what is meant by each, might be worth adding a brief sentence clarifying that at the top.

Author: Will add these to the glossary and xref here. https://github.com/flutter/flutter/issues/107609#issuecomment-2097066395

> While this guide focuses on OpenGL ES with EGL, the steps to setup rendering with another client rendering API (Metal and Vulkan) are fairly similar and you should be able to follow the same pattern for other backends.

Reviewer 2: `setup rendering` -> `set up rendering` or maybe even `set rendering up`

Author: Done.

> This guide details extremely low-level setup and the `//impeller/renderer` API directly above the HAL. Most users of Impeller will likely use the API using convenience wrappers already written for the platform. Interacting directly with the HAL is extremely powerful but also verbose. Applications are likely to also use higher level frameworks like Aiks or Display Lists.

Reviewer 2: `Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)` (i assume)

Author: Done.

> This guide details extremely low-level setup and the `//impeller/renderer` API directly above the HAL. Most users of Impeller will likely use the API using convenience wrappers already written for the platform. Interacting directly with the HAL is extremely powerful but also verbose. Applications are likely to also use higher level frameworks like Aiks or Display Lists.

Reviewer 2: can Aiks and Display Lists link to documentation for them?

Building Impeller for the target platform is outside the scope of this guide.

> [!CAUTION]

> > The code provided inline is pseudo-code and doesn't include error handling. See the headerdocs for more on error handling and failure modes. All classes are assumed to be in the `impeller` namespace. For a more complete example of setting up standalone Impeller, see [this patch](https://github.com/flutter/engine/pull/52472/files) that adds support for Impeller rendering via Wasm [in the browser and WebGL 2](https://public.chinmaygarde.com/impeller/wasm/wasm.html).

Reviewer 2: the patch will bit rot over time, is there some way we can link to tested code that will remain up to date?

Author: In a separate patch, I'm going to check it in. I didn't want to setup the toolchain and testing for a target that was a toy.

# Setup

> To get started with Impeller rendering, you need to setup a context and a renderer. For backend specific classes, the convention in Impeller is to append the backend name as a suffix. So if you need to create an instance of an `impeller::Context` for OpenGLES, look for `impeller::ContextGLES`.

Reviewer 2: `set up`

`setup` is the noun, `set up` is the verb

Author: Done.

> To get started with Impeller rendering, you need to setup a context and a renderer. For backend specific classes, the convention in Impeller is to append the backend name as a suffix. So if you need to create an instance of an `impeller::Context` for OpenGLES, look for `impeller::ContextGLES`.

Reviewer 2: `backend-specific`

Author: Done.

In our case, we need a `impeller::ContextGLES` and `impeller::Renderer`.

## Setting up WSI with the EGL Toolkit

Before we get to `OpenGLES` we need to do a bit of WSI. While we can resort to using EGL directly, Impeller has a handy toolkit for it.

First create an EGL display connection:

```c++

> egl::Display display;

Reviewer 3: nit: would be nice to include headers for the various symbols referenced, although that would make this doc a bit more fragile.

Author: Yeah, I figured linking the patch would be sufficient and leaving the includes for brevity.

Reviewer 2: fwiw (not saying we need to do this here), what we do in the flutter/flutter repo is literally extract out the \`\`\` bits of code and statically analyze them, and what we do in the flutter/packages repo is have the README files explicitly link to actual code that is tested and then enforce that the README file snippets match the actual code. In both cases the result is that code in documentation is checked on every commit.

Author: I spoke to @yjbanov and I may just check in the code. Previously, I didn't want to setup the toolchain and testing for a target just for documentation.

```

> Ask the display for a valid EGL configuration. Impeller needs and OpenGL ES 2.0 configuration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Ask the display for a valid EGL configuration. Impeller needs an OpenGL ES 2.0 configuration.
```

```c++
egl::ConfigDescriptor egl_desc;
egl_desc.api = egl::API::kOpenGLES2;
egl_desc.samples = egl::Samples::kOne;
egl_desc.color_format = egl::ColorFormat::kRGBA8888;
egl_desc.stencil_bits = egl::StencilBits::kZero;
egl_desc.depth_bits = egl::DepthBits::kZero;
egl_desc.surface_type = egl::SurfaceType::kWindow;

auto config = display.ChooseConfig(egl_desc);
```

> Once a valid config has been obtained, create a context and window surface. Creating the window surface requires a native window handle. Get the appropriate one for your platform. For instance, on Android, this is an `ANativeWindow`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once a valid config has been obtained, create a context and window surface. Creating the window surface requires a native window handle. Get the appropriate one for your platform. For instance, on Android this is an `ANativeWindow`.
```

```c++

> auto context = display.CreateContext(*config, nullptr /* sharegroup */ );

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
auto context = display.CreateContext(*config,  /* sharegroup=*/ nullptr);
```

auto surface = display.CreateWindowSurface(*config, native_window_handle);
```

> Now that we have context, make it current on the calling thread. This should be fully setup WSI.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now that we have a context, make it current on the calling thread. This will complete the setup of WSI.
```

```c++
context->MakeCurrent(*surface);
```

## Creating the OpenGL ES Context

> Impeller doesn't statically link against OpenGL ES. You need to give it a callback the return the appropriate OpenGL ES function for given name. With EGL, this can be something as simple as:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Impeller doesn't statically link against OpenGL ES. You need to give it a callback the returns the appropriate OpenGL ES function for given name. With EGL, this can be something as simple as:
```

```c++
auto resolver = [](const char* name) -> void* {
  return reinterpret_cast<void*>(::eglGetProcAddress(name));
};
```

Adjust as necessary.

> Once you have the resolver, you need to create an OpenGL ES proc table. The proc table contains the table of OpenGL ES procs that Impeller will need at runtime.

Reviewer 4: proc table contains the proces is a bit repetitive.

Maybe something like "the proc table contains the function ptrs for the subset of the OpenGL ES API used by impeller"

Author: Done. Copied almost verbatim.

```c++
auto gl = std::make_unique<ProcTableGLES>(resolver);
```

Once the proc table is created, the resolver will no longer be invoked.

> Then you need to provide the context a shader library that contains a manifest of all the shaders the context will need at runtime. Remember, Impeller doesn't generate shaders at runtime. Instead `impellerc` generates blobs that can either be delivered out of band or be embedded directly in the binary. When embedding the blobs directly in the binary, find the symbols referring to the shader blob somewhere in the generated build artifacts. A vector of mappings to these blobs needs to be provided to create context creation factory.

Reviewer 2: it's not immediately clear to me what "find the symbols" means here. Where would I look for them?

Author: This is very application specific. The engine embeds the blob directly in the binary but it can be loaded separately. In the WASM example, its fetched via an XHR. I'll add a separate document detailing this.

In our little toy setup, we only have a single thread. We tell Impeller which thread to use by creating a subclass of an `impeller::ReactorGLES::Worker`. Let's create a simple worker:

```c++
class ReactorWorker final : public impeller::ReactorGLES::Worker {
 public:
  ReactorWorker() = default;

  // |ReactorGLES::Worker|
  ~ReactorWorker() override = default;

  ReactorWorker(const ReactorWorker&) = delete;

  ReactorWorker& operator=(const ReactorWorker&) = delete;

  // |ReactorGLES::Worker|
  bool CanReactorReactOnCurrentThreadNow(
      const ReactorGLES& reactor) const override {
    return true;
  }
};
```

Add an instance of this reactor worker to the context. Whew, that was unnecessarily complicated. But this is only necessary for OpenGL ES because of its tricky threading. Skip this step for Vulkan and Metal. Those APIs are already thread safe.

```c++
context->AddReactorWorker(worker);
```

> Once you have the context, use it to crate a renderer.

Reviewer 2: `create`?

Author: Done.

```c++
auto renderer = std::make_shared<Renderer>(context);
```

And setup is done. Keep the context and renderer around. We will be using it during frame rendering.

# Rendering Frames

Rendering frames is a matter of:
* Wrapping the onscreen texture as a Surface (`impeller::SurfaceGLES` in our case).
* Giving the surface to our renderer to render.
* The renderer will prepare a render target from this surface and invoke a callback that we'll use to setup a render pass directed at that render target.
* Populate the render pass how we see fit.
* Tell our reactor worker that all operations need to be flushed to OpenGL.
* Present the onscreen surface.

> * Repeat.

Reviewer 2: the grammar of these bullet points is not consistent (the top two are noun phrases, the third is a sentence in the future tense, the remainder are in the imperative)

Author: Done.

## Wrap the Onscreen Surface

> Per frame, the onscreen surface can be wrapped using SurfaceGLES::WrapFBO where the default framebuffer in our case if FBO 0. Take care to to ensure that the pixel format matches the one we used to choose the EGL config. Figuring out the pixel size is left as an exercise for the reader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Per frame, the onscreen surface can be wrapped using SurfaceGLES::WrapFBO where the default framebuffer in our case is FBO 0. Take care to ensure that the pixel format matches the one we used to choose the EGL config. Figuring out the pixel size is left as an exercise for the reader.
```

Reviewer 2: was this change applied? i still see the if/is error in the text i'm reviewing

Author: Sorry. The push I thought pushed failed due a confict. It should be fixed now.

> Per frame, the onscreen surface can be wrapped using SurfaceGLES::WrapFBO where the default framebuffer in our case if FBO 0. Take care to to ensure that the pixel format matches the one we used to choose the EGL config. Figuring out the pixel size is left as an exercise for the reader.

Reviewer 2: missing backticks around `SurfaceGLES::WrapFBO`

Author: Done.

```c++
auto surface =
    SurfaceGLES::WrapFBO(context,                         // context
                         swap_callback,                   // swap callback
                         0u,                              // fbo
                         PixelFormat::kR8G8B8A8UNormInt,  // pixel format
                         GetWindowSize()                  // surface size
    );
```

## Setup the Swap Callback

> The swap callback will get invoked when the renderer presents the surface. Remember in our list of things to do, we need to first tell the reactor worker to flush all pending OpenGL operations and then present the surface. Setup the swap callback appropriately.

Reviewer 2: `Set up`

Reviewer 2: actually `Set the swap callback up`

Author: Done.

```c++
SurfaceGLES::SwapCallback swap_callback =
    [surface, context]() -> bool {
  context->GetReactor()->React();
  return surface->Present();
};
```

## Render to the Surface

> Give the surface to the rendere along with a callback that details how you will populate the render target the renderer sets up that is directed at that surface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Give the surface to the renderer along with a callback that details how you will populate the render target the renderer sets up that is directed at that surface.
```

```c++
renderer_->Render(std::move(surface),
                 [&](RenderTarget& render_target) -> bool {
                    // Do things that render into the render target.
                    return true;
                 });
```

> And that's it. Now you have functional WSI and render loop. Higher level frameworks like Aiks and DisplayList that use the render target to render their rendering into to the surface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's it. Now you have a functional WSI and render loop. Higher level frameworks like Aiks and DisplayList use the render target to render their rendering into the surface.
```

> And that's it. Now you have functional WSI and render loop. Higher level frameworks like Aiks and DisplayList that use the render target to render their rendering into to the surface.

Reviewer: So if I'm understanding this correctly, I would be able to create an `AiksContext` allowing me to use the Aiks API?

Author: Yes. Aiks also needs a typographer to layout and render text. Most layers in the API stack have a context and you build one using the context of the layer below. Feel free to file a bug for documentation on how to set that up (or any other topic).

Reviewer: Cheers!
